Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of
the day host, Ricardo Loops. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Christian Hart. He is a professor
of Psychology at Texas Women's University where he is the
Director of the Psychological Science Program, as well as
the director of the Human Deception Laboratory. His research
explores the behavioral cues of deception, pathological, lying
, lying within relationships, lying, morality and the
factors that influence decisions to be honest or deceptive.
And today we are focusing mostly on his two books
, Pathological Lying Theory, Research and Practice and his
latest one, big liars. What psychological science tells
us about lying and how you can avoid being duped
. So Dr Hart, welcome to the show.
It's a big pleasure to everyone. Uh Thanks for
having me, Ricardo. It's a great pleasure for
me to be here. I'm a big fan of
your podcast. Well, thank you so much.
So, get, let's get right into it.
And I would like to start perhaps with a basic
question. So what is a lie exactly? I
mean, since you approach, I guess lying and
honesty from a psychological viewpoint, uh what counts really
as a lie here. Uh we define lying as
a, a communication that's intended to convince someone of
something that we know is untrue. So, and
, and, and when I say communication, we
, we usually mean uh the spoken word but also
obviously the written word. Um but we also communicate
using gestures and using silence. Um So any uh
natural communication that's that we use to try to impart
um some information on someone else that we know to
be untrue. And do we know before we get
into lying itself, do we have good enough data
to tell how honest people are in general or not
? Well, the way that we study dishonesty and
lying is, um, is primarily through self report
. So we ask people and, you know,
there's the inherent problem in there when we're asking people
to self report about their behavior. Are they giving
us accurate information, especially on a topic like dishonesty
? And so we, we try to, um
, you know, set the stage, uh,
such that people will be, um, straightforward when
they're telling us about their patterns of lying. And
one of the ways we do that is we,
um, have them give us that information anonymously.
So typically through anonymous online surveys. So there's no
one judging them. So there's no real incentive to
, to, um, to be dishonest. Uh
, we also normalize lying like we'll usually, uh
, set the stage by, by telling people,
most people lie fairly regularly. Uh, almost everyone
lies at some point. And so now we want
to know about your patterns of lying and, and
we, we have some evidence that when people self
report about their lying, they're actually giving us accurate
information because uh you know, there are, there
are uh experimental techniques where we could ask people whether
they lie a little or lie a lot and they'll
tell us and, and then we can bring them
into the laboratory and set up contrived situations where they
can, um, either be honest or they can
lie for a financial reward. And what we find
is people who say I tend to lie a lot
. They tend to actually lie in those laboratory situations
. And then people who say they're particularly honest tend
not to lie in those situations. So we have
some validity checks that suggest those, uh, self
report measures are, are probably fairly accurate. Mhm
. So, I would imagine that pretty much everyone
lies some of the time and, and I'm not
saying I'm not talking here about big massive deceptions or
anything like that. I mean, it's mostly,
I would imagine like small white lies that don't cause
damage at all, I would imagine. But let
me actually ask you about that. So, should
we, first of all, should we expect the
people to be honest most of the time? And
when they are dishonest? I mean, what are
some of the most common ways people lie? Really
? Yeah. And so we, we do find
that most people are mostly on most of the time
. And so, one of the ways that,
that we assess lying in, in our laboratory is
we, we ask people, how many lies have
you told in the past 24 hours? And the
majority of people say zero and, and of those
people who say they have told a lie, it
tends to be pretty minimal, one lie or two
lies. Um But we do have this subset of
people that, that lie and extraordinarily uh lie extraordinarily
uh frequently. Um And when we look at why
people lie, you're right. You know, these
tend not to be big lies. Most of the
uh reasons that people give for lying are to avoid
shame and embarrassment. So they're lying to save face
essentially. And um and, and so people's deception
tends not to be malicious. Uh uh Most of
the lying tends to be uh protecting themselves and people
lie for privacy sake. Um People also tell lies
just to smooth over social interactions. And so,
you know, when I come into the office and
one of my colleagues says, how are you doing
today? Even if I'm not doing that that great
, I'll say I'm doing fine. And it's because
neither of us wants to have a difficult conversation about
my personal life struggles at that moment. You know
, so we, we tell these uh these lies
pretty regularly just to allow uh social interactions to proceed
smoothly and I might be wrong here. But isn't
it also the case that uh a big chunk of
the time when we lie? It's not actually uh
uh really a straight uh straight out lying but mostly
like omitting some information that people do not ask us
directly. But perhaps we might think. Oh,
ok. So perhaps if I were 100% honest,
I should also make deciding not to do that something
like that. Right. Yeah, that's, that's
what we find is that, um, if most
people wanna avoid giving honest answers, they will use
the most morally defensible strategy possible. And, and
the, the, the easiest one is just to
avoid a topic entirely so different, then I don't
need to talk to you about these, uh,
unpleasant things that I don't wanna, um, that
I don't wanna discuss other ways that, that we
can answer or respond dishonestly is by minimizing, um
, by using vague language. And so most people
will only use an outright lie as is the,
the strategy of last resort because an outright lie is
in most people's minds kind of morally indefensible. If
you're caught in a lie, it, it,
it has some big, um, social repercussions and
reputational repercussions. And so most of us will try
to, um, find these, uh, uh
, less grievous, uh, uh, strategies for
being dishonest. Yeah. Basically some small ways of
circumventing, uh, total honesty. Right. Exactly
. Exactly. Ok. So, a and using
or referring to the title of one of your books
, the most recent one. Who are these big
liars, what characterizes them? Well, when we
, we've studied thousands of people in our studies and
what we find consistently, as I mentioned earlier is
most people are pretty honest, but there's this small
subset that, that lies um extraordinarily. And so
when we're talking about big liars in the book,
we talk about really kind of two groups of people
, people who lie very frequently. Um But also
um people who tell maybe fewer lies but lies that
have massive consequences. And so when we look at
the types of people who tend to lie very frequently
, we see some patterns. Um one is they
turn um lying kind of peaks in late adolescence for
most people and then declines across adulthood. And so
younger people tend to lie more than older people.
Um We've looked at gender differences and what we find
is that men and women don't really lie differentially as
far as frequency, men. I mean, there's
a slight difference but it's, it's like 4% difference
. It's pretty uh minor. But when we look
at people who lie a lot, it's predominantly men
. And so when we look at those people who
probably, you know, 10 or more lies a
day, uh the men, uh definitely outnumber um
the women. And then there's other patterns that we
see um in personality traits. For example, we
see that um, self esteem is associated with lying
. So people with low self esteem tend to lie
considerably more than people with higher self esteem. And
that kind of tracks with, um, you know
, some of the things I was talking about earlier
is people often lie out of a sense of shame
or embarrassment, things like that. Um And then
we also see some personality traits like the the dark
triad personality traits like Machiavellian is and, and psychopathy
. So people who are kind of generally kind of
nasty, manipulative people use dishonesty, um, more
often than people who don't, uh, have those
personality traits. And then, you know, so
, so those are some of the factors that are
associated with being, uh, prolific liars or big
liars. Ok. So let's go through some of
the differences there, break them down a little bit
further. So, uh, you mentioned there,
for example that, uh, generally speaking, there's
not a big difference in the rates of lying between
men and women, but among the big liars,
most of them seem to be male. So,
is there any explanation to for that? Well,
when we, uh, when we look at,
um, how some of these big liars operate,
some of them are, um, more, uh
, manipulative and they will kind of callously take advantage
of others. And those traits are, are much
more common in men than they are in women.
Um, sort of status seeking is much higher in
males um, and so it's, it's possible that
those are actually the underlying traits that are, uh
, more related to the lying rather than the,
you know, the biological sex itself. It's these
, um, these traits that probably are to a
certain degree socialized and probably to a certain degree,
there's something, you know, different in our underlying
biology that gives rise to these traits where males,
more than females tend to outright, um, use
outright manipulation as a technique to get ahead in the
world. And what about uh some general biological differences
? I mean, are there any notable biological differences
between big liars and the general population? There's really
limited research on this topic. Um There is um
there has been some research looking at um a gray
matter and white matter in the brain. So,
gray matter are essentially the the neurons and white matter
are the pathways the myelinated axons. And um there's
some research suggesting that people who lie extraordinarily have uh
more white matter to gray matter ratio than, than
non prolific liars in the frontal lobe of the brain
. So this is the frontal lobe of the brain
is, you know, one of the parts of
the brain that are really essential for executive processes like
um you know, plans making and things like that
. And so there's been some speculation in the literature
that um these differences and executive functioning processes due to
differences in underlying biology might be relevant to these patterns
that we see with some people lying less and some
people lying more. Um, there's also evidence that
dishonesty is a heritable trait. So it's maybe it's
coded in our genes to a certain extent. Um
, and so the heritability is about 30% which means
about may, maybe about 30% of the variability that
we have and people's tendency to be honest is related
to our underlying genes. And, um, and
certainly there's heritability for things like, um, like
psychopathy and just that tendency to, you know,
take advantage of others without having much remorse about it
. So, so those, that's probably about the
extent that we can say anything, um, definitive
about the underlying biology of being a big liar.
By the way, when it comes to possibly thinking
about honesty as a trait as a personality trait,
I guess in this case, does it relate in
any way to the exec personality traits? Because one
of them is honesty, humility. Is there any
relationship there or, or not? Oh, sure
. And that's one of the ways that we assess
, you know, honesty and dishonesty is using the
Hexaco traits. Um, we have a few other
measures of honesty and dishonesty. But, but,
um, yeah, that, that broad personality trait
, um, uh, is, um, is
a principal measure that we use. And what about
culture and the context where people live in? Does
that also play a role in shaping the differences between
big liars and the rest of the people. Uh
, it, it does. And we can,
you know, when we think about culture, we
can think about the, the very local level,
like the, the family that someone lives in.
There's great variability there. And, um, so
I, I teach a seminar on Deception. I
talk with my students about the families they grow up
in and there's, there's a wide range of,
uh, of, um, styles, uh,
and attitudes toward honesty and dishonesty that we see where
now some students who talk about their parents have raised
them and told them if you can get ahead by
lying, you should, you know, so they're
really almost encouraging. Um lying is a strategy.
And we see that in families where um the parents
are very punitive, um the Children tend to lie
a lot more, uh actually in families where uh
a person just has siblings, they tend to lie
a lot more. So there's something about sibling dynamics
that might be relevant. But if we look at
culture more broadly, what we do see is that
, for example, across countries, there's different attitudes
about dishonesty and honesty and it's kind of uh really
domain specific. And so for example, in some
countries and certain um occupational fields, it's accepted to
be dishonest and not in other fields. And so
, but very broadly, yeah, we do see
um across countries, when we ask people about their
tendency to lie in some countries, people lie a
lot more than in others. And it seems to
track, uh along with, um with broad social
organizations. So in countries where there's a lot of
corruption, for example, the individuals in those countries
tend to lie a lot more. And I guess
that there are also cultures where, I mean,
you're not allowed to express certain ideas or say certain
things out of politeness and courtesy, I guess,
like, for example, Japan and places like that
where there are things that people really feel very,
very uneasy saying, but not, not, I
, I'm not sure if that's actual dishonesty because it's
done out of politeness, courtesy and stuff like that
. But I mean, perhaps from our point of
view it would be dishonest in a way. Right
. Yeah, sure. You know, the,
the, the taboos, um, uh, vary
considerably from one culture to another. And so in
countries where there are a lot of taboo topics,
you'd expect there to be a lot of, um
, less than fully honest communication. And we can
actually see that historically in western Europe, um,
how honesty and dishonesty has been treated and how it's
been interpreted has changed considerably over like the past 500
years. Um, and, uh, where at
certain times it would be considered deeply, deeply offensive
to be honest. And so it was expected or
encouraged to be dishonest. And we can see that
even in, like, in the United States right
now that, you know, Children are are taught
not to uh express their true feelings about a gift
they've received. For example, if they receive a
gift that they don't like, they're, they're uh
indoctrinated into this uh style of, of acting as
if they do like it and commenting about how much
they enjoy it when they actually don't. Mhm.
Does uh this kind of big lying, have anything
to do with personal philosophies? Sure. Um we
, we uh have a, a scale or a
measurement that we use, um, fairly often that
assesses people's attitudes toward lying and it asks questions like
, you know, it's ok to lie sometimes and
people strongly agree or strongly disagree. And what we
see is that there's pretty wide variability in people's attitudes
about honesty and the importance of honesty. And some
people see honesty is absolutely essential and they fret that
they're not being honest enough and other people have a
more cavalier attitude about honesty or dishonesty and feel like
dishonesty is necessary and there's nothing particularly wrong with it
. And so they are much more apt to lie
. And, I mean, why is it,
what motivates these big liars? Exactly. I mean
, why do they lie so prolifically and monumentally sometimes
, at least there's a lot of, uh,
different reasons why people lie lying is really just a
strategy that we use to, you know, achieve
, uh, you know, that the outcomes that
we want to experience. And so in some cases
, you know, people are wanting to facilitate social
relationships. And so they lie in order to,
you know, bond with people or feel a sense
of connection with people. Um in other cases,
people are trying to gain a financial advantage or a
power advantage. And so they're lying for those reasons
. So, um you know, the, the
motivations for lying are as, as varied as the
motivations for doing anything we do in the world.
Um And so, you know, it's really kind
of hard to talk about why people lie or what
the motivations are because it's simply a tool that people
use. You know, and, and we,
we have a, a lot of psychological manipulation tools
in our toolbox that help us achieve our goals.
And at the end of the day, lying is
just one of those. So getting into another possible
aspect of what leads big liars to become a big
liar. So, uh is there anything about uh
developmental psychology? I mean, their childhood development that
is special or not? Well, we see that
um patterns of lying emerge early in life. And
so in developmental psychology studies, we see that most
Children will start lying between the ages of two and
three and they're usually not very good at it,
they fumble around, they're not very convincing. Um
Yeah, and, but as they get older,
by the time Children are five or six, they're
pretty good at, at telling lies that completely convince
their parents for example. Um And so the trajectories
that we see is that most Children lie more and
more as they get older until they reach adolescence.
Um But then we see this kind of break in
the trajectories where most, for most people, their
lying tends to, um start to decline at that
point. And one of the reasons is that there
are pretty harsh, uh, social and reputational consequences
for being known as a liar. And so we've
probably all had experiences where we've been caught in a
lie. And so people start to learn that there
are more uh socially productive ways to get what we
want other than lying. And so that, that
trajectory is they tend to um lie less. But
for some Children, that trajectory just uh keeps on
in, in an upward direction. And so,
uh we can start to see these patterns of who
are going to be the big liars and who aren't
pretty early on when we look at like pathological liars
and we interview them and we ask them, you
know, when their lying first became really problematic in
their lives, for the vast majority of them is
during adolescence, a and in the book, you
talk about different types of liars, like for example
, storytellers, exaggerators, pathological liars. And we'll
come back to the pathological liars specifically later on in
our conversation and also psychopath. So, uh are
these all different kinds of big liars? And if
so what distinguishes them from one another. Well,
the, uh, the, the, they are
all liars and, and they're, yeah, I'd
say they're different types and essentially there are different motivations
for them all. Um, the storytellers and exaggerators
. These are people who are primarily, uh,
telling lies because they like the positive attention that comes
their way when they're telling these exaggerated outrageous stories.
So, you know, I, I grew up
, uh, down the street from a person who
told, told wild stories all the time and I
think everyone knew that they were alive, but they
were just so outrageous that we couldn't turn away.
And so, uh so I think some people,
some storytellers uh that is their motivation is that,
that warm glow of attention when they're, when they're
um saying these outrageous things, um uh path,
uh the psychopaths. On the other hand, these
are people that, you know, callously and remorselessly
use others and, and take advantage of others to
get what they want. And so their motivation is
to treat other people as just mere objects or pawns
in their game to get what they want in the
world. And so they have a much more selfish
and self serving ambitions and goals and uh that disregard
of the, the rights and welfare of others.
And so, you know, you can kind of
see the, the big distinction there. But then
I, as I mentioned earlier, we also have
people who lie considerably, um because they they believe
themselves to be inadequate. And so they're, you
know, have this um painfully low self esteem where
they feel like they're just never measuring up. And
the only way they can feel good about themselves is
to present a false version of themselves to the rest
of the world. A and so I, I
mean, there are in the book, you mentioned
several different occupations where we find some big liars,
but before getting into the occupations themselves, le legitimate
occupations in this case, what about scam artists?
Is there anything special about them? You know?
Uh I, I don't know if there's anything special
about them, although they, they tend to have
psychopathic traits that is, they, they tend to
not have a lot of empathic regard for others.
Um but they, they also are really good at
justifying their bad behavior and um and we're all good
at justifying our bad behavior, but they tend to
be pretty exceptional at it where they tend to have
a philosophy or a belief that uh what they're doing
isn't really all that bad. And so I'm not
really harming someone because they have plenty of money or
they would do the exact same thing to me if
they could. Therefore, it's fine for me to
do it to them. And so when we look
at um and scam artists and, and other criminals
for that matter, they tend to be pretty adept
at finding justifications for their own behavior. I think
most of us do that to a certain degree.
But we, we get to a line where we
eventually have this self-recognition that I'm being a bad person
. I'm being the type of person I don't wanna
be and it prevents us from, from carrying out
too many um uh too many awful things. A
and so there are certain occupations that you talk about
in the book where people, uh I mean,
there are sanctioned lies there uh or some frequent sanctioned
lies like for example, in the case of lawyers
, doctors and politicians. So, uh I mean
, is it the case that perhaps in these kinds
of occupations, we find a higher proportion of uh
quote unquote big liars than in the general population.
And uh and if so why we, we do
and I guess I don't wanna lump all these occupations
in together when talking about this. Uh you know
, for example, when we, when we look
at uh uh physicians, um most of them report
that they're not fully honest with their patients. And
so they'll do things like they report that they're,
they give overly optimistic uh prognoses uh for their very
ill patients in order for their patients to have more
hope. And so this is really kind of a
benevolent lie. Like the, the doctors are lying
for their own sake, they're lying for the sake
of their patients. Um And usually they're not even
outright lies. It's kind of like, as we
talked about before, we can minimize, we can
just not talk about certain things. And, um
, but when we look at, um, in
, in, in the field of sales, for
example, what we find is that, you know
, lying or being dishonest, maybe not lying,
um, necessarily, but being dishonest is oftentimes,
uh, an important trait and it's actually valued by
employers, you know, and so, uh,
if you're trying to sell an inferior product at the
same price as a superior project, that's an impossible
task if you're being honest all the time. And
so we need to exaggerate advantages and minimize flaws and
things like that. And in, in politics,
what we find is that, you know, people
, when we ask people, what, in what
fields are people more honest or dishonest. People tend
to, um, tend to list politics as being
uh a field in which people are most dishonest.
And there's some truth to that. Um, politicians
are placed in a difficult position of trying to please
a broad constituency where people have different, uh goals
and wants and needs. And so trying to please
everyone is difficult to do if you're being honest all
the time. But what we find is that politicians
, uh politics is in a field is not a
field where dishonest people, um enter that field,
the people who enter politics are just as honest as
, um any other person in the general population.
What we see is that once people enter into politics
, the pressures are put on them where they find
that they need to become dishonest. And in fact
, um, there's some research in Western Europe showing
that politicians who are willing to lie are much more
likely to be re-elected than politicians who are unwilling to
lie. So, uh, so it might be
that the field itself, um, molds people into
being big liars. So it seems that at least
in some uh some prominent occupations, uh being dishonest
, uh gets you places. Right. Absolutely.
So let me ask you about one particular topic now
. So people also sometimes lie in relationships but particularly
in romantic relationships. So why do people lie in
those cases specifically? I mean, what are their
motivations and what do they usually lie about what they
lie about? And their motivations probably depends a lot
on the, the phase of the relationship. And
so there's a lot of research on um kind of
the, the initial phases, the dating phase of
relationships. And um looking at online dating websites,
for example, both men and women tend to be
uh fairly dishonest when they're describing themselves, their attitudes
, their history. And essentially, you know,
if we're on the dating market, we're trying to
make the best case for ourselves. We, we're
trying to market ourselves and the way that we pull
that off is exaggerating positives and minimizing, minimizing negative
traits. And so, um for example, men
know that women, uh, oftentimes have a,
a particular height standard that they're looking for in prospective
mates. And so men tend to exaggerate how tall
they are. They also tend to exaggerate, um
, the, the, the status or the,
uh, of their, uh, profession or the
amount of income they have and things like that and
, and women do the same thing just, uh
, you know, they lie about things that are
being selected on, um, by, by,
um, people who are looking at them as mates
. Um Now once you get into established relationships,
um, the, you know, the, the
, the tension around, uh, uh uh those
, um, types of traits are probably much less
. And so the topics that people lie about start
to differ. Um What we find is that men
and women in relationships do lie to each other even
in well established relationships. But the, the lies
tend to be focused on maintaining uh peace and harmony
in the relationship. And so people will, will
lie in order to prevent a fight from emerging or
, but they also lie for benevolent reasons, um
, to boost the sen the sense of self esteem
and their partners. Um And so the, the
lies tend to be more supportive in nature, but
certainly when people are doing bad things in relationships,
they'll lie about it. So, you know,
people lie about their Infidelities and, and, um
, you know, drug habits and things like that
. Um But again, you know, their,
what their, what their ultimate goal is, is
to try to preserve their relationship and they're using lies
to make that happen. But we've, we've studied
lies within the context of people's sexual relationships as well
. And what we found in those cases is that
the, the majority of the reasons that people are
lying in the context of their sex lives is to
make their partners feel better. So they, they
feign enthusiasm and they, they lie about the fact
that they're, you know, also thinking about other
people and, and things like that, but the
, the goal that they, um are trying to
achieve, at least their self reported goal is to
try to make the experience more pleasant for their partners
. And what about familial relationships and friendships? Because
sometimes people also lie in those contexts, right.
Yeah, absolutely. Um, we, we see
in, in adolescence, for example, the people
they lie to most is their friends. We thought
it'd be parents but it's their, their friends.
And, um, and when we look at why
they're lying, it's, it's oftentimes, you know
, getting back to this idea of they're trying to
save face, they're trying to present themselves as being
, you know, more desirable as, as uh
friends than perhaps they feel like they are. But
when we look at adult in adults, um people
tend to be pretty honest with their close friends.
Um, you know, all of us have this
, uh, this, this desire to present genuine
versions of ourselves to people who will accept us.
And when we have those close friendships with people,
we tend to seek them as the, the outlets
where we'll be most honest about who we are and
what we're thinking and, and our wants and desires
and so forth. Mhm. And I, I
mean, talking, uh, a little bit since
we're talking about relationships, getting a little bit into
some of the negative aspects and consequences of lying in
this context. So what are the ways by which
social relationships get fractured by deception? Well, you
know, trust is, uh, is really,
uh, can be difficult to build and it takes
time to build like to us. Like if you
just imagine the person who you trust more than anyone
in the world, the reason you trust them is
they've established this very long track record of being honest
and, and being a, a trustworthy partner.
Um, but it's also very easy to fracture that
trust. You know, just one lie can,
uh, undo all of the, the trust that's
been built up over years, but we do treat
lies differently. And so not all lies are,
are given the same moral weight and, or ethical
weight. And so when within relationships, for example
, if people find that someone has told a white
lie, they tend to overlook that and it doesn't
really damage the trust. However, if someone is
caught telling a selfish lie where they're taking advantage of
their close partner, then, then obviously that's gonna
fracture the trust and, uh, you know,
and, and in some cases, the, the
trust is fractured to such a degree that it's impossible
to rebuild. Um, if we look at,
you know, within friendships, but we can also
look more broadly at trust. We can, we
can see that the amount of trust between people varies
quite a bit from one location to another, from
one country to another or one society to another.
Um, uh, there's a, a book out
that, uh, that covers, uh, distrust
within a small Romanian village where essentially no one trusts
each other. And it's, it's really remarkable how
, um, how different that, so that society
operates when you only can really count on a small
handful of people and everyone else is essentially viewed as
a danger or a threat. And so, but
by the way, by the way, just one
second, the book you're talking about is living with
distrust by Rabu Umbridge. That's correct. That's correct
. Yeah. Yeah, I, I've had him
on my show. So, yeah, it's,
it's, it sounded familiar. Yeah. Yeah.
So it's really remarkable when you read about what it's
like to live in a deeply distrustful society compared to
a trustful one. It's, uh, it's much
more challenging. Yeah. And so, I mean
, are there any specific cases where perhaps people might
need interventions to reduce lying in relationships? And if
so, are there those kinds of interventions. Yes
. Uh There are people, I get emails from
people at least weekly um explaining that they're lying or
their partners lying or their children's lying is causing massive
problems within their relationships and they're asking me for help
. So there's, there's certainly people who experience lying
is out of control and in need of some uh
change. And uh I think fortunately the, the
um standard um tools that we have for psychological intervention
for other types of problems are pretty um effective for
helping people deal with lying, standard cognitive behavior,
therapies. For example, you know, a lot
of the reasons that people lie is um because of
how they're thinking about the world and, and what
they're seeing is there options for interacting with people and
we can help people cultivate tools to find different strategies
for getting the same things they're trying to achieve.
So going, getting back to the big liars,
I would like to uh hear a little bit more
about, let's say they, their models operandi.
So how do they get away with their lies?
Exactly. Do they usually resort to particular strategies or
tactics or how, how do they go about it
? We've, we've interviewed a lot of people about
their strategies for lying. Um And it's pretty interesting
because we all have ideas about how liars behave.
And so when we ask uh people, you know
, what, what are liars look like? Like
how can you tell if someone's lying, they say
, well, liars, avoid eye contact and liars
fidget a lot. And liars touch their face and
liars, stutter and stammer. But when we ask
liars how they tell convincing lies, they essentially do
the opposite of those things. They say, I
make eye contact. I try not to fidget.
I try not to stutter and stammer. Um So
those are some of the techniques that they use is
, um, is just to try to look normal
is what most of them say. And so we
have a, a sense of what our normal behavior
looks like. And so we can just try to
continue to engage in that normal looking behavior when we're
telling lies, another strategy that um the big liars
report using is to plan their lies. So if
they know that the topic is gonna come up,
they plan in advance what they're gonna say. Um
And they also plan the types of details that they're
gonna reveal and the ones they won't reveal. And
, and oftentimes a strategy, a strategy that they
use is to bury a lie within a cloud of
truth. So I can tell you a story that
is almost entirely truthful. And then there's just this
one lie and that makes it difficult to detect when
most of what I'm saying is coherent and consistent with
the information that you already know. And so it
appears truthful and then I just hide that one lie
within the midst of it, by the way,
are people generally good at lie detection? No,
they're not. They're actually pretty poor at lie detection
. Um And so the way that we study,
uh, you know, how good people are detecting
lies is we, we typically record videos of people
who are lying or telling the truth. And then
we show these videos to participants in our study and
we just ask them to identify who are the liars
and who are the people who are being honest.
And in a lot of these studies, half of
the videos are of liars and half of them are
telling the truth. And we find that people are
, their accuracy rates are around 54% where, you
know, you get 50% accuracy just flipping a coin
. And what this suggests is that people are really
, really poor lie detectors and in the, in
the cases where they do detect liars, it tends
to be because some people just aren't very good liars
. There are some people who, when they're telling
a lie, it's just kind of obvious. But
those are the minority of people, the vast majority
of people are, is concerned when they're lying or
being honest just by looking at their body language or
listening to their tone of speech and things like that
. So, so to answer your question, yeah
, people are not very good uh lie detecting and
uh as a person who studies lying, I'm aware
of that myself. Uh, in my classes,
we do activities where people tell lies and tell the
truth and I'm no better than the average person.
And we actually see that in, uh, in
, you know, professions where people are, you
know, part of their job is to, to
, to detect lying, like with police interrogators and
things like that. They are no better than college
students that watching these videos and figuring out who's lying
, who's telling the truth. And so how are
most lies detected when they are detected? I mean
, what makes for uh what, what leads to
someone really uncovering a lie? Usually, you know
, the, the primary way in the, in
the way we study this is we just ask people
like think of the last time you detected that someone
was lying. How did you figure it out?
Um What we find is that almost no one says
, oh, they fidgeted or they weren't making eye
contact, what they, what they talk about is
evidence that they uncovered. So they say, oh
, this person said something, it was inconsistent with
this other fact that I already knew about or they'll
report that they had third party information. So my
, you know, my romantic partner said they were
at this party, but I talked to people with
the who were at the party and they said,
you know, my romantic partner wasn't there at all
. And so, so that's how people tend to
discover lies that um most lies go undiscovered. Uh
When we ask people about their lying and we ask
them what proportion of your lies get discovered. They
say it's a very, very small minority of lies
that get discovered. I think part of that is
we don't really care if someone tells me if I
say, how are you doing? And they say
I'm doing fine. I don't really care if they're
not doing fine. I mean, in, in
the sense where I'm gonna try and dig deeper and
find out if they're lying. It's only in really
consequential situations where we realize someone's motivations might be at
odds with ours. And the outcome of them being
honest versus dishonest has um uh a, a deeply
profound effect on me. In those cases, I'll
start digging and looking for additional information and, and
even trying to solicit confessions and things like that.
Um So, uh that's, that tends to be
how we uncover lying is by digging deeper. And
two big liars themselves use particular strategies to avoid detection
. Yeah. What we find is that the people
who are good liars tend to be really good actors
that is they can feign emotions very well. Um
And they, they are also very good at controlling
details and so they're very um selective and how they
present information. Um but they tend to present themselves
as friendly, confident, engaged with the person who
they're talking to and they concoct when they do concoct
lies, the lies tend to be very plausible and
they present them in a way where they found where
they sound very certain. And so, uh,
earlier when we talked about relationships, I, I
asked you what sort of, uh, consequences might
lying have on different kinds of social relationships. What
about the effects that big liars can, there can
have both on themselves and on society more generally?
Well, when we, um, look at the
effect it has on themselves and we, when we
talk to people, uh like pathological liars, like
they feel awful like they, they come to us
and, and, and want help because they feel
like their lives are unfolding or they feel like they
just, uh you know, can't be genuine with
anyone anymore. And so there's, you know,
some pretty good evidence that when people lie a lot
, they, they actually have neg negative outcomes for
themselves in a lot of ways. But, you
know, when we look at, um, you
know, the effects that big liars have on society
more broadly, you know, they, they,
you know, lying in other forms of uh dishonesty
lead to, you know, billions of dollars and
fraud every year. And so there's this massive societal
consequence and, you know, even when we look
at politics, you know, when people, um
, um you know, develop this deep mistrust for
politicians that it, you know, gravely alter society
in a lot of ways. And so, so
, yeah, uh you know, certainly lying can
affect the individual, but the consequence of the lying
permeates out into society and causes all sorts of mayhem
. Uh And so we've been referring to pathological liars
throughout our conversation, but what characterizes them? Exactly
. And I mean, is this some sort of
a clinical diagnosis or not? So, yeah,
we wrote a book that was published last year on
a pathological lying and the, the reason we,
and I'm talking about when I say we uh my
colleague uh Drew Curtis and I um have been doing
a lot of this research on pathological lying. And
we're interested in that because it's a topic that is
, you know, familiar in our vernacular. We
talk about pathological lying all the time when we use
the term people seem to know what we mean.
But um there hadn't been any consistent research on this
topic. The first people that the first researchers that
looked at pathological lying were doing research on it over
100 years ago. Um But there hasn't been a
consistent definition of what the term means. And so
in our review of the literature, we found 17
different definitions of pathological lying that have been used over
the decades and there's a lot of inconsistency. Um
And so when we started talking about pathological lying,
we started thinking of it in the, the context
of the way that we um identify other mental health
disorders. So, pathology or psychopathology like anxiety disorders
and mood disorders like depression. When we're talking about
those, we tend to um think of the,
the person as um having some uh adjustment problems in
their relationships or in the workplace. They're also experiencing
discomfort and distress around this, this problem that they're
having. Um and of oftentimes the disorder puts them
at some sort of risk, uh you know,
um sometimes it's risk of, of injury or death
and sometimes it's risk of like incarceration and things like
that. And so when we started thinking about pathological
lying, we put it in that framework. So
we talked about, we define pathological lying as um
a a pattern of excessive lying. That's oftentimes compulsive
in nature, it causes disruption in people's lives,
it causes them to experience distress and oftentimes puts them
at, at risk. Uh But I mean,
in terms of, let's say disease classification, is
there any category specific category for this kind of uh
behavior that does it have any specific name or term
in, for example, the DS M or,
or, or elsewhere? Yeah. So in the
United States, we use the DS M or the
diagnostic and statistical manual of the American Psychiatric Association.
And that's basically the, the book in which every
recognized mental health disorder is listed along with the diagnostic
criteria. And pathological lying isn't listed as a um
a diagnosis in, in that manual. Um it's
listed as a, as a, a symptom of
a few disorders, but uh like personality disorders.
Uh for example, but, but not as a
disorder in and of itself. So my colleague Drew
Curtis is currently doing a lot of work to more
better represent pathological lying. And he's doing some good
work showing that some people exhibit pathological lying in the
absence of any mental health disorder, any other mental
health diagnosis which suggests maybe it is a stand alone
condition and should be recognized as a stand alone um
diagnosis. Mhm. And, and I mean,
if it would be recognized as a stand alone diagnosis
, would you have, for example, a set
of criteria for diagnosing someone as a pathological liar?
Yeah. So uh and we're, we're working on
some diagnostic tools right now. So we have a
uh uh a diagnostic self report measure um that uh
is about to be published right now. It's under
review at a journal. And um and so we've
done a lot of work validating it showing that people
who seem to meet these criteria that we've set out
for pathological lying have poorer life outcomes, like they're
more likely to have problems in their relationships, problems
at work and so forth. They also um report
higher levels of emotional distress on these different psychological measures
that we've used to validate it. They also have
this lifelong pattern of pathological lying. So the lying
isn't just a, a response to a specific event
in their life. And so, yeah, there
does seem to be some consistency with the way that
we're defining it and the uh the, the symptoms
and outcomes of these pathological liars are exhibiting. But
in this particular case, since you're labeling it,
pathological lying, should we assume that people would have
this condition when it's classified as a condition that they
have no control over it, that they basically cannot
help themselves if they don't get any sort of treatment
or something like that. you know, that's that
, that kind of gets down to, you know
, deeper questions around free will and things like that
. So to say that someone has no control over
something I think is a, a bit of a
stretch like we have control over, you know,
most things in our lives, but the, the
difficulty we face controlling things like as someone who is
uh uh addicted to smoking cigarettes, they, they
have control but they find that control very challenging.
And so I think the goal that we have as
psychologists is to offer people who are having difficulties controlling
um coping mechanisms and strategies to help them better control
uh those behaviors that they're trying to reduce. Uh
And if this turns out to be a condition in
and of itself, uh do you expect it to
uh uh do you expect that we will be able
to treat it somehow? I mean, are there
, for example, already any tools at our disposal
to deal with other conditions where perhaps some of them
might even have pathological lying as one of the criteria
for diagnosis that would also or could also apply here
. Yeah, I believe so. And I,
I mentioned earlier in our conversation, um, cognitive
behavior therapy has, has demonstrated some effectiveness. And
so essentially what we're doing with that therapy is we're
helping people change their beliefs and their attitudes about things
that are going on in their lives and the hope
that those changes and beliefs will lead to changes in
behavior. There's also some evidence that um you know
, some pharmaceutical treatments might be effective um to help
with like kind of compulsive behaviors um and anxiety as
well. But all of this research is very,
very preliminary. And so, uh my colleague,
Doctor Curtis is, is uh starting to do some
work trying to validate some of these treatments, but
it's difficult because in order to, to carry out
these days, you have to find a large enough
group of pathological liars. And so it's pretty a
pretty slow process. But, you know, we
do have people um coming through his laboratory that uh
we're beginning some of this research on. So let
me just ask you one last question earlier, we
mentioned here how people usually are not very good at
lie detection, but are there perhaps some scientifically validated
ways that people can avoid being by liars? I
mean, at least perhaps some things that people try
to might try to pay attention to some strategies that
they might use, like, for example, I'm
not asking people particular things or paying attention to this
or that, I mean, is there something like
that or not? Yeah. Um I think the
, the principal technique is to, or the principal
strategy is just to recognize when another person's motives are
in conflict with your own. And that's when we
tend to see dishonesty um occurring. And so just
recognizing when that's happening is important, um but then
we can also use strategies uh that include digging deeper
for information. And so uh one strategy I use
, I I, I'm a professor, so I
have students lying to me all the time. And
so I'll ask them for more details about their story
and sometimes they'll, you know, report details that
are in conflict with something I already know, or
they'll report details that are in conflict with something they've
previously stated. And then another strategy is to have
people retell stories. And sometimes if it's a fabricated
story, when they retell it, the details will
change. Um But primarily what, what I look
for is uh inconsistencies and when you see inconsistencies,
that's when you, you know, you might wanna
dig a bit deeper. Um and then sometimes,
uh you know, just asking for honesty is effective
, you know, if we suspect someone is being
dishonest, just simply uh soliciting a confession saying,
like, look, I know that this is a
hard thing to talk about but it's really important for
me that we have an honest conversation here. Can
you just give me the honest answer? And I'll
accept that uh what we find is that a lot
of people will just confess at that point. And
so really checking facts though is the, is the
, the key way. There's no uh secret uh
technique that you know, that, you know,
Sherlock Holmes uses other than looking for the evidence.
And so, so that's what we focus on.
Great. So, Doctor Hart, let's send on
that note then and just to mention the books again
, the latest one, big liars, what psychological
science tells us about lying and how you can avoid
being duped. And the other one, pathological lying
theory, research and practice. I'm leaving links to
them in the description box of this interview. And
apart from the books, would you like also to
tell people where they can find you and your work
on the internet? Uh They can uh find me
at my uh my website um at Christian O heart.com
and uh and then on my academic website. Um
But uh yeah, thanks so much for having me
on the show. I've really enjoyed the conversation.
It's been a great time. Ok, thank you
so much for coming on the show. It's been
a pleasure to talk to you. All right,
thanks. Joy. Enjoyed the conversation. It's been
a great time. Ok. Thank you so much
for coming on the show. It's been a pleasure
to talk to you. All right, thanks.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview.
Until the end. If you liked it, please
share it. Leave a like and hit the subscription
button. The show is brought to you by the
N Lights learning and development. Then differently check the
website at N lights.com and also please consider supporting the
show on Patreon or paypal. I would also like
to give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and
Frederick Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ
Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert
Wine in NAI Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield,
Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark. Smith J Tom Hummel s Friends
. David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach
Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nico
Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi na Me,
Gary G Alman Sam of Zed YPJ Barboa, Julian
Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca,
Beto Lati Cortez Solis Scott Zachary FTD and W Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki
, Georgio, Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore
, Larry Dey Junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey
. Then spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon
, Jake. Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor
. Luke Neeson, Chris to Kimberley Johnson. Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson
, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman
, Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam
Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good
enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina
, Tom Veg and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik
Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John
Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi
, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.